docs: ✨ Initial draft of functions to extract osdc population (#71)
steno-aarhus/osdc: vignettes/function-flow.Rmd

---

> title: "Function Flow"

Author: ```suggestion
title: "Function flow"
```

Author: @lwjohnst86 So we're not pro sentence casing in titles?

output: rmarkdown::html_vignette
bibliography: references.bib
csl: vancouver.csl
vignette: >

>   %\VignetteIndexEntry{Function Flow}

Author: ```suggestion
  %\VignetteIndexEntry{Function flow}
```

  %\VignetteEngine{knitr::rmarkdown}
  %\VignetteEncoding{UTF-8}
---

> 

Author: I think that an introduction to what this vignette includes would be nice here :)

Reviewer: Wanna take a stab at it? 😛

## Function conventions

The below conventions are *ideals* only, to be used as a guidelines to
help with development and understanding of the code. They are not hard
rules.

### Naming

-   First word is an action verb, later words are objects or conditions.
-   Exclusion criteria are prefixed with `exclude_`.
-   Inclusion criteria are prefixed with `include_`.

> -   Helpers that get or extract a condition ("pregnancy" or "date of

Author: ```suggestion
-   Helpers that get or extract a condition (e.g., "pregnancy" or "date of
```

    visit") are prefixed with `get_`.
-   Helpers that drop or keep a specific condition are prefixed with

>     `drop_` or `keep_` ("first visit date to maternal care for pregnancy

Author: ```suggestion
    `drop_` or `keep_` (e.g., "first visit date to maternal care for pregnancy
```

    after 40 weeks"). These types of helpers likely are contained in the
    `get_` functions.

### Input and output

-   Few arguments, with one or two core required argument.
-   `include_` functions take a register as the first argument.
    -   One input register database at a time.
-   `exclude_` functions can take a register as the first argument or
    take the output from an `include_` function.
-   Second argument can be an output data from another function.

## Function flow

The OSDC algorithm - and thereby, the `osdc` package - contains one main
function that will classify individuals into those with either type 1 or

> type 2 diabetes using the Danish registers: `classify_diabetes()`. This

Author: ```suggestion
type 2 diabetes using the Danish registers: `classify_diabetes_status()`. This
```
And then output will include all individuals that were in the input data and not only individuals with diabetes, as we, @Aastedet and I, discussed at some point?

function classifies those with diabetes (type 1 or 2) based on the
Danish registers described in the `vignette("design")`. All data sources
are used as input for this function. The specific inclusion and
exclusion details are also described in the `vignette("design")`.

This results in the functionality flow for classifying diabetes status
seen below. All functions take a `data.frame` type object as input and
outputs the same type of object as the input object (a `data.frame`
type). For instance, if the input is a `data.table` object, the output
will also be a `data.table`.

![Flow of functions, as well as their required input registers, for
classifying diabetes status using the `osdc` package. Light blue and
orange boxes represent filtering functions (inclusion and exclusion

> events, respectively).](images/function-flow.png)

Author: Add what the white/uncoloured boxes are :)

> events, respectively).](images/function-flow.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
events, respectively). Uncoloured boxes are other functions.](images/function-flow.png)
```

Author: ```suggestion
events, respectively). Uncoloured boxes are helper functions that get or extract a condition.](images/function-flow.png)
```

## Inclusion events

### HbA1c tests above 48 mmol/mol

The function `include_hba1c()` uses `lab_forsker` as the input data to
extract all events of tests above 48 mmol/mol.

<!-- TODO: Add details on how this filtering should be done -->

### Hospital diagnosis of diabetes

The function `include_diabetes_diagnoses()` uses the hospital contacts
from LPR2 and 3 to include all dates of diabetes diagnoses. Diabetes
diagnoses from both ICD 8 and ICD 10 are included.

This function contains two helper functions:

-   `keep_diabetes_icd10()`
-   `keep_diabetes_icd8()`

<!-- TODO: Add details on how this filtering should be done, e.g., diagnosis codes -->

<!-- TODO: Which specific ICD 8 and 10 codes are included? -->

### Diabetes-specific podiatrist services

> The function `include_podiatrist_services()` uses `sysi` or `sssy` as

Author: Should we include what the abbreviations sysi and sssy mean here? - same goes for e.g., lmdb in the next section

Reviewer: Not really, this document isn't about describing that stuff, that's what the other documents are for. This is only for the function flow.

input to extract the dates of all diabetes-specific podiatrist services.

<!-- TODO: Add details on how this filtering should be done -->

### GLD purchases

The function `include_gld_purchases()` uses `lmdb` to extract the dates
of all GLD purchases (from 1997 onwards).

<!-- TODO: Add details on how this filtering should be done -->

<!-- TODO: Add this + link to resource "For details about this, see [link]." -->

## Exclusion events

### HbA1c tests and GLD purchases during pregnancy

The function `exclude_pregnancy()` uses diagnoses from LPR2 or LPR3 as
input and is used to exclude both HbA1c tests and GLD purchases during
pregnancy.

Internally, this relies on the function `get_pregnancy_dates()` that
contains the following three helper functions:

-   `calculate_pregnancy_index_date_for_mc_visits_wo_end_date()` (this

>     might be removed with the inclusion of the birth register)

Reviewer: I don't really know what this does.

-   `get_pregnancy_end_dates()`: Keep maternal care visits with an end
    date and drop visits between 40 weeks before end date and 12 weeks
    after end date.
-   `get_maternal_care_visit_dates_without_end_date()`: Uses the output
    from `get_pregnancy_end_dates()` which identifies maternal care
    visits *with* end dates to derive maternal care visits *without* end
    dates. below.

<!-- TODO: What is done with the mc visits without end dates then? -->

<!-- TODO: Add details on how this filtering should be done -->

### Glucose-lowering brand drugs for weight loss

> The function `exclude_purchases_weight_loss_drugs()` uses REGISTER as

Author: ```suggestion
The function `exclude_purchases_of_weight_loss_drugs()` uses REGISTER as
```

input and excludes BRANDS.

<!-- TODO: Add details on how this filtering should be done -->

<!-- TODO: Add data source and which brands are excluded -->

### Metformin purchases for women below age 40

> The function `exclude_pcos()` as input to exclude all purchases of

Author: ```suggestion
The function `exclude_potential_pcos()` as input to exclude all purchases of
```
Just to make it clear that its only a filter for potential pcos?

metformin by women below age 40 (i.e., \<= 39 years old) at the date of

> purchase.

Author: Include which registers/variables are used here?

Reviewer: Great question 😆

Author: I have added a TODO item in the vignette about this. Resolving this conversation.

This function contains two helper functions:

-   `keep_women()`
-   `drop_age_40_below()`

<!-- TODO: Add details on how this filtering should be done -->

## Get initial diagnosis date

> Then, the first inclusion and exclusion events from the function outputs
> are dropped with `drop_first_event()` so that only those with two or
> more events are kepts. This is then used to assign an initial diagnosis
> date with `get_initial_diagnosis_date()`. Then all the outputs are
> joined together at the end.

Author: Is `drop_first_event()` a helper function in `get_initial_diagnosis_date()`? 
```suggestion
Then, the initial diagnosis date is assigned with `get_initial_diagnosis_date()`. 
Within this function, the first inclusion and exclusion events from the function outputs
are dropped with `drop_first_event()` so that only those with two or
more events are kept. Then all the outputs are joined together at the end.
```

Author: (if not: just remove the `s` from `kepts`)

Reviewer: I'll reject this change, since it will get changed if we do the `get_diagnosis_date()`.

## Drop diagnosis dates outside of coverage

> Finally, from the raw initial diagnosis dates, those dates outside of

Author: ```suggestion
Finally, from the raw initial diagnosis dates, the dates outside of
```

the data coverage period are dropped to end with a final diagnosis date

> using `get_final_diagnosis_date()`. For details on this censoring based

Author: Hm.. There's something that's not totally clear in the naming of `get_initial_diagnosis_date()` and `get_final_diagnosis_date()`. Could this last one be a helper function `drop_diagnosis_dates_outside_coverage` inside a `get_diagnosis_date()` instead?

Reviewer: I like this plan as well. Want to update these?

---
title: "Function flow"
output: rmarkdown::html_vignette
bibliography: references.bib
csl: vancouver.csl
vignette: >
  %\VignetteIndexEntry{Function flow}
  %\VignetteEngine{knitr::rmarkdown}
  %\VignetteEncoding{UTF-8}
---

## Introduction

This vignette describes the function conventions and function flow of

> the `osdc` package. The function convention sections go over how we name

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the osdc package. The function convention sections go over how we name
```

Just a small thing. Most package documentation in many packages refer to packages without backticks. It doesn't really matter which, but its good to be consistent.

Author: Alrighty. We'll do it without backticks 👍

The below conventions are *ideals* only, to be used as a guidelines to
help with development and understanding of the code. They are not hard
rules.

### Naming

-   First word is an action verb, later words are objects or conditions.
-   Exclusion criteria are prefixed with `exclude_`.
-   Inclusion criteria are prefixed with `include_`.
-   Helpers that get or extract a condition (e.g., "pregnancy" or "date
    of visit") are prefixed with `get_`.
-   Helpers that drop or keep a specific condition are prefixed with
    `drop_` or `keep_` (e.g., "first visit date to maternal care for
    pregnancy after 40 weeks"). These types of helpers likely are
    contained in the `get_` functions.
-   Helpers that join registers or output of other functions are
    prefixed with `join_`.

### Input and output

-   Few arguments, with one or two core required argument.
-   `include_` functions take a register as the first argument.
    -   One input register database at a time.
-   `exclude_` functions can take a register as the first argument or
    take the output from an `include_` function.
-   Second argument can be an output data from another function.

## Function flow

> The OSDC algorithm - and thereby, the `osdc` package - contains one main

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The OSDC algorithm - and thereby, the osdc package - contains one main
```
